EIP-4844: Free the blobs (#3244)
ethereum/consensus-specs: specs/eip4844/p2p-interface.md

| Name                                     | Value                             | Description                                                         |
|------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | `MAX_REQUEST_BLOCKS_EIP4844`             | `2**7` (= 128)                    | Maximum number of blocks in a single request                        |

Author: ffc78e99282e65cc4da92c4dba0743be434d367b - see expanded comment below

| `MIN_EPOCHS_FOR_BLOBS_SIDECARS_REQUESTS` | `2**12` (= 4096 epochs, ~18 days) | The minimum epoch range over which a node must serve blobs sidecars |

## Containers

### `BlobSidecar`

```python
class BlobSidecar(Container):
    block_root: Root
    index: BlobIndex # Index of blob in block
    slot: Slot

>     block_parent_root: Root # Proposer shuffling determinant

Author: I intend to post a separate PR adding slot in a number of places for deneb - it's a general problem IMO that deserves a general solution - in the meantime, I've kept with the current slot-less tradition that is broken the way you describe.

>     block_parent_root: Root # Proposer shuffling determinant

Author: https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/pull/3249

>     index: BlobIndex # Index of blob in block
>     slot: Slot
>     block_parent_root: Root # Proposer shuffling determinant
>     proposer_index: ValidatorIndex
>     blob: Blob
>     kzg_commitment: KZGCommitment
>     kzg_proof: KZGProof # Allows for quick verification of kzg_commitment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    index: BlobIndex  # Index of blob in block
    slot: Slot
    block_parent_root: Root  # Proposer shuffling determinant
    proposer_index: ValidatorIndex
    blob: Blob
    kzg_commitment: KZGCommitment
    kzg_proof: KZGProof  # Allows for quick verification of kzg_commitment
```

Author: c8719f85246a64383bd8cd0a977f88d7a3a255bb

> | Name | Message Type |

Author: ffc78e99282e65cc4da92c4dba0743be434d367b

| - | - |
| `blob_sidecar_{index}` | `SignedBlobSidecar` (new) |

#### Global topics

EIP-4844 introduces new global topics for blob sidecars.

##### `beacon_block`

The *type* of the payload of this topic changes to the (modified) `SignedBeaconBlock` found in EIP4844.

##### `blob_sidecar_{index}`

This topic is used to propagate signed blob sidecars, one for each sidecar index.

The following validations MUST pass before forwarding the `sidecar` on the network, assuming the alias `sidecar = signed_blob_sidecar.message`:

- _[REJECT]_ The sidecar is for the correct topic --
  i.e. `sidecar.index` matches the topic `{index}`.

> - _[IGNORE]_ The sidecar is not from a future slot (with a `MAXIMUM_GOSSIP_CLOCK_DISPARITY` allowance)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- _[IGNORE]_ The sidecar is not from a future slot (with a `MAXIMUM_GOSSIP_CLOCK_DISPARITY` allowance) -- i.e. validate that `sidecar.slot <= current_slot` (a client MAY queue future blocks for processing at the appropriate slot).
```

Author: 8bc19d99aea32897be7eace506b1b344b33b0de1

- _[IGNORE]_ The sidecar is from a slot greater than the latest finalized slot --
  i.e. validate that `sidecar.slot > compute_start_slot_at_epoch(state.finalized_checkpoint.epoch)`
- _[REJECT]_ The proposer signature, `signed_blob_sidecar.signature`, is valid with respect to the `sidecar.proposer_index` pubkey.

> - _[IGNORE]_ The sidecar is the only sidecar with valid signature received for the tuple `(sidecar.slot, sidecar.proposer_index, sidecar.index)`.

Reviewer 3: I would consider upgrade this to `REJECT` if we are implying that the block with multiple sidecars *MUST* be discarded. If we say `*MAY*` discard then `IGNORE` makes sense

Reviewer 2: Ah, but it is not attributable that the sender knew that there was a duplicate (or that you already got it) before sending. Thus it has to be IGNORE as it can't strictly be downscored

>   -- Clients MUST discard blocks where multiple sidecars for the same proposer and index have been observed.

Reviewer 2: I don't agree with this. This can cause network fragmentation and at the very least should not be buried in a blob gossip condition.

A sophisticated enough of a network adversary could create a permanent split (if "discard" is forever). Imagine partition A that sees block_a and extra blobs, then drops. Whereas partition B sees the same for block_b. But then partion A sees block_b and *not* the extra blobs. They'll accept block_b whereas B rejected it.

It's dangerous to create any of these permanent rejections that have to do with your transient view.

Normally gossip `IGNORE` on duplicates doesn't really create a permanent split due to IWANT/IHAVE and getting reference messages (e.g. the block) and downloading the dependencies (e.g. it;s parent). This is the case with all of our seen flag conditions, it increases the propagation time and reduces amplification factor (messages are gotten moreso by direct req/resp), while reducing the chance a messages becomes canonical.

I think the most we can rely on is that (1) the actor is bound to the proposer and (2) the proposer reduces the chances of their message becoming canonical by spamming bad blobs, thus opportunity cost not to spam.

Reviewer 4: I too am skeptical of this condition, it implies we'd have to cancel block processing or invalidate previously imported blocks if we see an second blob from the proposer after we've seen a valid blob + block combination

Author: Right - this needs a different formulation (it was intended to allow two blobs per tuple, but I realize even that is risky) - the core idea here was to allow / encourage the next proposer to drop blocks whose proposer has been spamming the network, similar to how lighthouse penalises late blocks by reorging them.

We can achieve this by changing this "seen" condition to allow N blobs per `[slot, proposer, index]` - the key point is to create conditions favorable for the next proposer to observe all these blobs and therefore not build on them.

If we allow just one blob, it's possible for the network to become saturated with an invalid blob while still having a valid blob reach the proposer - we will then indeed have to fall back on req/resp to "recover" - IWANT/IHAVE will not be enough since ignored messages are not kept in gossipsub caches. The larger the N, the larger the cost but also the greater the chance that any >=2 blobs reach next proposer. Some N is needed, else proposer can keep spamming.

It's somewhat ugly, but there exists an alternate way to solve this dilemma: we keep the seen-once condition as stated here, however if we see a blob whose signature is valid but commitment is not, we try to recover it with req/resp: if we get one, we reset the "seen" condition for the tuple and rebroadcast the "correct" block.

The above will mean that:
* we get the invalid blob with valid signature and send it to our mesh neighbours
* if we get a valid blob, we'll IGNORE
* we notice the blob was invalid later in the pipeline and recover the valid blob with req/resp (randomly querying peers: any of our neighbours might have seen the valid blob)
* we regossip the valid blob (so as to ensure that the valid blob remains in the gossipsub caches)

Author: 3a37c3c4978467f8909f66d8899b80b9e1373e72 - I've gone for the option that allows proposers to orphan evil block proposers that spread junk - to avoid network splits, we have to be careful to clear seen caches so that the valid block _can_ propagate - I *think* this should be enough to discourage anyone from trying, ie the network should _eventually_ settle on being able to gossip the block _or_ it will be orphaned depending on timing - both those outcomes are fine, even if they take up some bandwidth to get there.

> - _[REJECT]_ The sidecar is proposed by the expected `proposer_index` for the block's slot

Reviewer 2: I think we also need an `IGNORE` prior to this condition

> _[IGNORE]_ The blob's block's parent defined by `blob.block_parent_root`) has been seen (via both gossip and non-gossip sources) (a client MAY queue blocks for processing once the parent block is retrieved).

Author: 8bc19d99aea32897be7eace506b1b344b33b0de1

> - _[REJECT]_ The sidecar is proposed by the expected `proposer_index` for the block's slot

Reviewer 2: I wonder if this should come before the proposer signature check. That is, abort if it's the wrong proposer before wasting the time on the signature check. This comes at the cost of going and looking for the block_parent_root, but that condition is already an MAY queue when you go look for it.

this is slightly different than the beacon_block conditions which have the proposer signature check before the shuffling dependency check. Beacon blocks are slashable so at most one can be made per validator per slot before being slashed. Whereas validators have an ~infinite allowance here with impunity.

That said, I question the ordering of the conditions beacon_block gossip spec... in the normal case you know the shuffling and should reject before doing the proposer signature check

Author: > I wonder if this should come before the proposer signature check.

we've never established a strict spec requirement to do the checks in the given order (spec grey zone), ergo clients today do checks in whatever order they like, depending on the state and implementation of internal caches / timings / etc - this has the downside of leading to mismatches in REJECT / IGNORE between clients for messages with multiple errors.

If we want to start mandating an order here, we need to explicitly state this (which would be outside the scope of this PR) - this would have an associated performance cost as well.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, I suppose the order isn't mandated but we have tried to always put them in a natural/anti-dos order

Author: copy-pasting is what I do best: https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/dev/specs/phase0/p2p-interface.md#beacon_block

| `BELLATRIX_FORK_VERSION` | `bellatrix.SignedBeaconBlock` |
| `CAPELLA_FORK_VERSION`   | `capella.SignedBeaconBlock`   |

No more than `MAX_REQUEST_BLOCKS_EIP4844` may be requested at a time.

#### BlobSidecarsByRoot v1

**Protocol ID:** `/eth2/beacon_chain/req/blob_sidecars_by_root/1/`

Request Content:

```python
class BlobIdentifier(Container):
    block_root: Root
    index: uint64
```

```
(

>   List[BlobIdentifier, MAX_REQUEST_BLOCKS_EIP4844]

Reviewer 4: Re-using the same `MAX_REQUEST_BLOCKS_EIP4844` here seems really weird because these requests aren't 1 to 1 with blocks. Even if it's still set to 128 (in practice we wouldn't query fore more than the number of blobs per block) I don't think the constant should be re-used

@divagant-martian made the point this would bite us if we ever wanted blobs per block > `MAX_REQUEST_BLOCKS_EIP4844`

Author: good point - I've introduced a separate constant _and_ adjusted to limits so that the limits always allow downloading 128 blocks _and_ their corresponding blobs in one request - for by-root, this means allowing a larger request - with current constants, we end up allowing 512 blobs, which data-size-wise has the same worst case as a 128-entry by-range request.

wdyt?

ffc78e99282e65cc4da92c4dba0743be434d367b

Reviewer 4: Yea that looks good!

)
```

Response Content:

```
(

>   List[BlobSidecar, MAX_REQUEST_BLOCKS_EIP4844]

Reviewer 3: Why don't we want `SignedBlobSidecar` here? Wouldn't we want to verify the proposer's signature too?

Reviewer 2: You already have the block if you are making this request thus you know the proposer signed the block and are looking for it's deterministic dependencies. I don't think you need to transmit (or check) the signature in this case.

The sidecar signature is primarily for the case/race condition in which you received the sidecar before the block which determines it's correctness

Reviewer 2: depending on if we send kzg proofs for singles or only for the aggregate, I could see an argument for keeping the signature. that is, if you have kzg_proofs just for the aggregate, then you can't do a relatively cheap check as you get singles here and need to wait to get them all. Whereas if you get individual proofs, you can verify them each quickly as they come (as a dependency of the block and the valid kzg commitment)

Reviewer 3: > I could see an argument for keeping the signature. that is, if you have kzg_proofs just for the aggregate, then you can't do a relatively cheap check as you get singles here and need to wait to get them all

Yep, that's what I was thinking

Reviewer 5: > depending on if we send kzg proofs for singles or only for the aggregate, I could see an argument for keeping the signature. that is, if you have kzg_proofs just for the aggregate, then you can't do a relatively cheap check as you get singles here and need to wait to get them all. Whereas if you get individual proofs, you can verify them each quickly as they come (as a dependency of the block and the valid kzg commitment)

The plan at the moment is to provide individual KZG proofs as described here https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/pull/3244#discussion_r1104236893 .

Author: Since we don't do aggregates anywhere any more, the current construct should be fine, wdyt @terencechain ?

Author: Ah, and we also have access to the fast multi-proof verifier.

@asn-d6 what's the performance ratio between verifying a kzg proof and a signature, in general?

Reviewer 5: > Ah, and we also have access to the fast multi-proof verifier.
> 
> @asn-d6 what's the performance ratio between verifying a kzg proof and a signature, in general?

Hmm, I would say both operations have about the same performance. We would need to benchmark them (and run them on the same machine) to get more precise numbers if accuracy is important.

Also both BLS sigs and KZG proofs can be verified in batch.

Reviewer 3: > Since we don't do aggregates anywhere any more, the current construct should be fine, wdyt @terencechain ?

good with me

)
```

Requests sidecars by block root and index.
The response is a list of `BlobSidecar` whose length is less than or equal to the number of requests.
It may be less in the case that the responding peer is missing blocks and sidecars.

> The response is unsigned, i.e. `BlobSidecar`, as the signature of the beacon block proposer

Reviewer 2: I agree that these can/should be dropped eventually but you at least need them within the IWANT/IHAVE window, right?

Author: IHAVE/IWANT are somewhat unrelated since they sit in the libp2p / gossipsub layer - the gossipsub layer doesn't care about types that way instead dealing with `message id -> message` where message has been type-punned.

may not be available beyond the initial distribution via gossip.

No more than `MAX_REQUEST_BLOCKS_EIP4844` may be requested at a time.

> `BlobSidecarsByRoot` is primarily used to recover recent blocks and sidecars (e.g. when receiving a block or attestation whose parent is unknown).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`BlobSidecarsByRoot` is primarily used to recover recent sidecars (e.g. when receiving a block whose kzg commitment is unknown.)
```

Reviewer 2: > e.g. when receiving a block whose kzg commitment is unknown.

Do you mean, when receiving a block but have failed to receive all associated blobs?
I don't think your e.g. makes sense as is

Author: 8bc19d99aea32897be7eace506b1b344b33b0de1

The response MUST consist of zero or more `response_chunk`.
Each _successful_ `response_chunk` MUST contain a single `BlobSidecar` payload.

> Clients MUST support requesting sidecars since `minimum_request_epoch`, where `minimum_request_epoch = max(finalized_epoch, current_epoch - MIN_EPOCHS_FOR_BLOBS_SIDECARS_REQUESTS, EIP4844_FORK_EPOCH)`. If any root in the request content references a block earlier than `minimum_request_epoch`, peers MAY respond with error code `3: ResourceUnavailable` or not include the blob in the response.

Reviewer 2: I think the error code was intended to only be if it was outside of the EIP4844 fork epoch. I think it would be worth clarifying to map more directly to the beacon_block by root requests

Author: > I think the error code was intended to only be if it was outside of the EIP4844 fork epoch

for blocks, we allow dropping the by-root index on finality - ie clients may not index blobs by root at all once they've been finalized (instead, they may end up stored in linear storage together with their corresponding blocks) - in such a design, it's not possible to answer "resourceunavailable" to an unknown root.

It also creates another problem: if we request two blocks, one inside the retention period and one not, what should the client answer? It's ambiguous, and I would preferably remove the error code completely.

> Clients MUST respond with at least one sidecar, if they have it.

Reviewer 2: Do they need to respond in order that they are requested? that is if request is [1, 2, 3], and they respond [2, 1], is that malicious?

Author: we don't require that for blocks - also, it doesn't quite make sense since we need to compute the hash of the responses in order to know which blob ended up missing (ie if I receive `[X, X]` to a `[1, 2, 3]` request, even if they're in order I don't know which ones they are)

Clients MAY limit the number of blocks and sidecars in the response.

> #### BlobsSidecarsByRange v1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### BlobSidecarsByRange v1
```

```

Response Content:

```python

> class BlobSidecars(Container):

Reviewer 3: +1 on `AggregateBlobSidecar`

> class BlobSidecars(Container):

Author: `BlobsSidecar` would be multiple blobs in a `Sidecar` - I take `Sidecar` to mean the fluff around each blob (index, proof etc). Otherwise, see above for thoughts on `Aggregate`.

> class BlobSidecars(Container):

Author: resolving as dupe

  block_root: Root
  List[BlobSidecar, MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK]

```
(

>   List[BlobSidecars, MAX_REQUEST_BLOCKS_EIP4844]

Reviewer 3: Using individual blobs here is not ideal, I wonder if we can have a wrapper that contains all the blobs in the slot

Reviewer 2: that's what `BlobSidecars` is. The plural version. I suggest we make it more clear `AggregateBlobSidecar` or something

Reviewer 3: Ah. I missed the plural version. Makes sense to call it `Aggregate` to keep it somewhat consistent with attestations and sync messages

Author: `Aggregate` though implies we compressed some information - I'll leave the naming question open for a bit, pending a name that captures the list-but-not-aggregate aspect.

Author: `BlockBlobSidecars` maybe. 

Or indeed, an `AggregateBlobsSidecar` with an aggregate proof and different field organisation, though I'm not convinced it's worth the complexity (vs simply reusing the existing "shapes").

Reviewer 2: yeah, I agree with "aggregate" having a semantic collision with Aggregate attestations...

Still need a better name than the subtle plural. Maybe `FullBlobSidecar` or something.

Author: discussed elsewhere, resolving this convo as dupe

)

> ```

Reviewer 6: Render here is broken, triple back quotes not closed see https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/deb82e2f26e9a7cf3062bcce544e842fcfdb72b5/specs/eip4844/p2p-interface.md#blobssidecarsbyrange-v1

Author: ffc78e99282e65cc4da92c4dba0743be434d367b
